---
title: No one calls him Saturnino
date: 2020-04-14
---

Microbiologist and pathologist Dr. René Dubos, author of *So Human an Animal*, won the 1969 Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction. In it, Dubos expressed concerns about how man is dehumanized by increasingly stark surroundings. If he were alive, Dubos may find Rick Owens to be an anomalous creature. Richard Saturnino Owens was born an only child to an allegedly racist and misogynistic father. He was raised in the sheltered environment of a small agricultural town and taught in a local Catholic school. Today this tall, raven-haired, progressively educated man is surrounded by stone benches and organic sculptures and listens to an array of strange and foul music. The modern Rick Owens shows little evidence of his past, and his modern-brutalist aesthetic seems to humanize rather than degrade.

Leaving his small town, a young Rick went to art school but soon dropped out. He landed a job cutting patterns for designer knock-offs. In the early 90s, married and broke, Rick toiled on the floor of his bedroom, cobbling together what would be his first collection. On these first pieces, Rick says, "I remember letting them lie around to see if Michele [Lamy] would pick them up, then I'd know they were OK. I bought the fabric from a dealer in remnants, and leather five hides at a time, washed them and dyed them. Then drove them in trucks to stores myself." Several stores turned him away, Charles Gallay did not.

Vogue wrote a piece on Rick's work with Gallay following the publication of a happenstance photo of Kate Moss wearing one of Rick's handmade jackets. The appearance of Kate Moss may seem like the fortunate materialization of lady luck, but in actuality, Rick's aesthetic was not sold to individuals, but rather served a simmering mood in the fashion underground. His work was satiating a sartorial hunger before he was found by Moss or Vogue. In his time working with Gallay, Rick Owens tapped into something primal, and in doing so he became an inevitability in the world of fashion. As he puts it "I don't think I really invented anything. I was just able to express what we were all maybe in the mood for." Indeed, Rick was not catering to an audience, but serving some deep need. People resonated with his passion, and so Rick Owens was born.

Some of the fans that wholly share Rick's vision might be seen as part of a greater tribe, an aesthetic that some unofficially call Goth Ninja. His most dedicated followers even join exclusive clubs that host after-hour party locations orchestrated by Owens. The required attire is not cheap--this monochromatic robe-and-leather style is undoubtedly avant-garde. His followers see Rick Owens less as a clothes designer and more of a Herculian leather Jesus. A$AP Rocky echoes this sentiment, "Rick is the God, *the* God of this shit." 

Owens is known for asymmetrical boiled lamb jackets, drop-crotch pants, drapey layered tops, and massive enveloping scarves--stuff normal people do not wear. Despite some followers' sartorial monomania, one category of his design oeuvre that remains stubbornly resistant to becoming stylistically insular is footwear.

In 2013 Owens decided to add running to his exercise regiment but found that none of his current footwear was agreeable to the task, "I can't wear my big chunky basketball shoes...I'd look like a dinosaur" he says. He contacted athletic companies, and using Adidas' knowledge as a design solution to his athletic inexperience, he developed his own running shoes. Many brands develop fast fashion, attempting to stay on the cusp of the style wave and serve the masses' flavor of the moment. Rick Owens' creations are fundamentally designed for his own use. Even today, Rick treats his design studio as if it is the world's most impressive personal closet--trying on and wearing the clothes himself as they are finished.

In addition to fashion, Owens has added some sculptural art to his oeuvre. Like his earlier days, he continues to experiment with organic and inorganic fabrics and materials, but over time Owens' clothing style has moved away from drippy and drapey and has become more stiff and sculptural. Rigid materials are less forgiving--one might say that they are more revealing of the designer's limits, and require heightened awareness. Owens says, "At the peak of your life, I suppose in theory, the ideal scenario is you gradually reach some kind of level of serenity and self-awareness. And my serenity ... My father was so interested in self-awareness and learning. As he got older, though, he just became more frustrated and more bitter and the opposite of serene." Perhaps Owens is still responding to lessons he learned in the household of his youth.
